The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Perjur'd Husband, by Susanna Centlivre

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Perjur'd Husband

Author: Susanna Centlivre

Release Date: February 19, 2012 [EBook #38931]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PERJUR'D HUSBAND ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Canada Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Book Search project.)










 THE
 Perjur'd Husband:

 OR, THE
 Adventures of VENICE.


 A
 TRAGEDY.


 Drawn from

 THE
 WORKS
 OF THE CELEBRATED
 Mrs. CENTLIVRE.

 VOLUME ONE


 LONDON:

 Printed for J. Knapton, C. Hitch and L. Hawes,
 J. and R. Tonson, S. Crowder and Co. W. Bathoe,
 T. Lownds, T. Caslon, and G. Kearsly.
 M.DCC.LXI.



[Decoration]


 THE
 PROLOGUE.

 By a GENTLEMAN.

 Spoken by Mrs. OLDFIELD.


  _Such dreadful Laws of late 'gainst Wit are made,_
  _It dares not in the City show its Head._
  _No Place is safe; each Cuckold turns Informer,_
  _If we make merry--it must be in a Corner._
  _And here's To-night, what doubly makes it sweet,_
  _A private Table, and a Lady's Treat:_
  _At her Reflections none can be uneasy,_
  _When the kind Creature does her best to please ye._
  _Humbly she sues, and 'tis not for your Glory_
  _T'insult a Lady--when she falls before ye._
  _But since no human Wit can stand the Test,_
  _With_ Gorman! _and the_ Champion of the West!
  _She'll fill the Lists, and then you cannot slight her,_
  (_With Honour safe_) _for she's_ a fair Inviter.
  _Expects no Favour, but at Honour's Call,_
  _Defies the boldest_ Briton _of you all;_
  _Whate'er's her Fate, she's sure to gain the Field,_
  _For Women always conquer, when they yield._





[Decoration]

Dramatis Personæ.


 MEN.

 _Count_ Bassino, _a_ Savoyard, _married to_    } _Mr._ Mills.
 Placentia, _and in Love with_ Aurelia,         }
 Armando, Bassino's _Friend_,                     _Mr._ Simpson.
 Alonzo, _a_ Venetian _Gentleman_, _betrothed  }
 to_ Aurelia,                                  }  _Mr._ Thomas.
 Pizalto, _a Noble_ Venetian,                     _Mr._ Norris.
 Ludovico, _a_ Frenchman,                         _Mr._ Fairbank.


 WOMEN.

 Placentia, Bassino's _Wife_,                     _Mrs._ Kent.
 Aurelia, _a young_ Venetian _Lady, betrothed_ }
 _to_ Alonzo, _but in Love with_               }  _Mrs._ Oldfield.
 Bassino,                                      }
 Forella, _her Woman_,                            _Mrs._ Baker.
 _Lady_ Pizalta, Pizalto's _Wife_,                _Mrs._ Moore.
 Lucy, _her Woman_,                               _Mrs._ Lucas.

 _Maskers, Dancers, Singers, and Attendants._

 SCENE, VENICE, in Carnival-Time.




THE PERJUR'D HUSBAND.




ACT I. SCENE I.

_The Curtains fly up, and discover a Mask in_ Pizalto's _House_.
Pizalto, _Lady_ Pizalta, Lucy; Ludovico _talking to Lady_ Pizalta;
Bassino _and_ Aurelia _talking together_; Florella _and other
Maskers_.

_A_ Spanish _Entry_.

_While the Dance is performing_, _enter_ Armando, _and gives_ Bassino
_two Letters, which he opens and reads_.

_Lady_ Pizalta _and_ Lucy _advance to the Front of the Stage_.


  L. Piz. Oh! _Lucy_, I'm undone----
  That Stranger there has charm'd my Heart: I feel
  The Pow'r of conquering Love; quick, quickly tell me,
  What shall I do to ease this racking Passion?

_Lucy._ Nay, Madam, I fancy your Passion has little Occasion for
Lenitives; it blazes so violently at first, 'tis like to be soon
extinguish'd.

L. _Piz._ Dear _Lucy_, don't trifle with me; but contrive, imagine,
do any thing, to bless thy Love-sick Mistress with the Sight of that
dear Man: And as an Earnest of further Rewards, here, take this----
[_Gives her a Ring._

_Lucy._ Madam, I receive your Commands with much Joy, but your Present
with more----[_Aside._] I'll try what this projecting Brain can do,
and if you step into the next Room, I'll soon give you an Account of
my Proceedings. [_Exit L._ Pizalta.

  _Bass._ Ye Gods!
  What have I done, that you pursue me thus?
  Why did you e'er decree that I should wed
  A Wife I now must hate? Why did I see
  The bright _Aurelia_? Why am I thus torn
  'Twixt Love and Duty? Oh! what Pangs, what Torments
  My Soul endures! Oh! my _Aurelia_!
                               [_Exeunt omnes, but_ Lucy & Ludov.

     Lucy _pulling_ Ludovico _by the Sleeve_.

_Lucy._ Sir, Sir, one Word with you.

_Lud._ Your Business----

_Lucy._ May one ask you a civil Question, and be resolv'd?

_Lud._ Hum--A civil Question, sayst thou? What's it, prithee, a
Night's Lodging? If so, pull off thy Mask, and I'll resolve thee
instantly----But I never strike Bargains in the Dark.

_Lucy._ I don't know, Sir, but it may tend to that, by way of Proxy,
at the long-run: But at present my Commission reaches no further than
to know your Lodgings; if any Thing comes on't, I fancy 'twill not
displease you.

_Lud._ (_Aside._) Hum----This is but a Pettifogger in Intrigues, I
find----Egad, I'm like to be pretty well employ'd during the
Carnival----Well, considering I am a Stranger here, this Hit may be a
lucky one, and the Lady handsome----Egad, I'll fancy her so at least,
wer't but for the Pleasure of Expectation.

_Lucy._ What are you studying, Sir? Are you so long resolving whether
you shall accept a Lady's Favour, or no?

_Lud._ No, faith, Child: I am not over-scrupulous in those
Matters----Let her be but Woman, and we shan't disagree----And so thou
mayst tell her----There's a Direction for thee. [_Tears the
Superscription of a Letter and gives it her._ [_Exit_ Ludovico.

_Lucy._ Frank and easy, _a la mode de Paris_----Well, these
indifferent Sparks charm more than all your cringing Fops----Now for
my Business--Let me see--I'll to my Lady, she'll write; I'll carry the
Letter, and the Devil will turn Saint, if I don't bring 'em together,
and merit a further Recompence.

  _By Coupling many have their Fortunes made;_
  _I only want Preferment, not my Trade._
                                                    [_Exit_ Lucy.


SCENE II.

_The Scene changes to_ Bassino's _Lodgings, and discovers the Count in
his Night-gown, a Table with Lights, and Letters lying on the Table_.


  _Bass._ All Things lie hush'd in peaceful Silence here:
  All but _Bassino_'s Mind----Oh! happy he
  Who lives secure and free from Love's Alarms.
  But happier far, who, Master of himself,
  Ranges abroad without that Clog, a Wife.
  Oh! rigorous Laws impos'd on Free-born Man!
  On Man, by bounteous Nature first design'd
  The Sovereign Lord of all the Universe!
  Why must his generous Passion thus be starv'd,
  And be confined to one alone?
  The Woman, whom Heaven sent as a Relief,
  To ease the Burden of a tedious Life,
  And be enjoy'd when summon'd by Desire,
  Is now become the Tyrant of our Fates.    [_Takes up a Letter._
  But hold, _Bassino_! whither does thy Passion
  Hurry thy wandering Reason: Let this Letter
  Re-call the Fugitive, and fix thy Senses
  On duteous Love----A Wife, so young, so fair,
  So excellent, whose Charms not three Months since
  Did fire thy Soul; a Wife, who dotes on thee;
  A Wife to whom thou sworest eternal Love----
  By Heaven, I swear again I will be true.
  This Thought again restores my Peace of Mind----
  No, charming Wife; no dear _Placentia_, no,
  Thou shalt not beg in vain: I will return [_Kisses the Letter._
  But who comes here--My Friend _Armando_?

      _Enter_ Armando.

  _Arm._ Dear Friend, I heard
  The Conflict of your Passion, and my Joys
  Are now compleat, since Virtue gains the Day.

  _Bass._ Yes, dear _Armando_, the Conflict is o'er,
  And I'm resolv'd to fly to my _Placentia_.

  _Arm._ Cherish that Thought: By Heaven your Resolution
  Transports my Soul with Joy!
  A kind, a virtuous Wife waits your Embraces;
  A Wife, who like a Turtle mourns the Absence
  Of her dear Mate. Haste then, my Friend, to drive
  That Cloud of Sorrow which o'ercasts her Mind,
  And, like the Sun, dispel her gloomy Thoughts.

  _Bass._ Thanks for your Counsel----
  You like a God support my feeble Virtue.
  This very Morning I'll prepare for _Turin_,
  Where Time and Absence will deface the Image
  Of that bewitching Beauty, which now haunts
  My tortur'd Mind--Yet, first I'll take my Leave
  Of this fair Charmer----And Heaven grant
  That I may see her unconcern'd----

  _Arm._ My Lord, what d'you mean?
  Have you well weigh'd the Danger of this Visit?

  _Bass._ What danger can there be?

  _Arm._ Danger! my Lord--Consider well how feeble
  Our Reason is against the Pow'r of Beauty----

  _Bass._ My Resolution's firm; no Charm can shake it.

  _Arm._ If not her Beauty, fear her Syren Tongue;
  fear her endearing Prayers, her fond Reproaches,
  Her tender Sighs, her Vows, her trickling Tears.
  Nay--if all these prove vain, fear her Despair,
  A Woman, an abandon'd Woman's Rage.

  _Bass._ Were there more Dangers, yet I'll stand 'em all;
  My Honour bids me pay this parting Visit:
  My Heart shall have no Share in what I'll speak.
  Trust me this once, and be yourself a Witness,
  _Bassino_ can controul unlawful Love.----

  _Arm._ My Lord, 'tis with Regret I see you go,
  May Heaven assist you in this dangerous Strife.


SCENE III.

Aurelia's _Chamber_; _she in an Undress with_ Florella.


  _Aur._ No more of that--Cease thy ungrateful Suit,
  _Alonzo_ is a Man I cannot love;
  I own he's witty, generous, and brave;
  Has all the Charms that Nature can bestow
  To fire a Woman's Heart----Yet I'm insensible,
  His very Sight chills all my trembling Spirits;
  Therefore, name him no more--I charge thee do not.

  _Flor._ Madam, I've done--Yet shall I be permitted
  To ask a Question? Are you then resolved
  Ne'er to admit a Passion in your Breast?

  _Aur._ Oh! Dear _Florella_, press not a Confession,
  Which but too well my Eyes themselves disclose.
  Alas! I love--I love to such Excess,
  That tho' I know I'm lov'd again, my Mind
  Is still perplex'd with Doubts and jealous Fears.

  _Flor._ You love and are belov'd! Then sure you reach
  The Height of human Bliss, and bounteous Heaven
  Can scarce give more----But who's the happy Man;
  Is it not Count _Bassino_?

  _Aur._ Oh! charming Name; there's Musick in that Sound!
  Yes, Count _Bassino_ is the Man I love.
  Canst thou now blame my Coldness to _Alonzo_?

  _Flor._ Forgive me, Madam, if I dare presume
  To speak my Sentiments: I must confess
  _Bassino_ is a Man of excellent Virtue;
  His Education at the Court of _Savoy_
  Has still refin'd what he receiv'd from Nature;
  His Person too is charming----
  And, what most Women court, he has a Title----
  But then consider, you are unacquainted
  With his Estate, and tho' his Equipage
  Denotes an ample Fortune, yet we see
  Many a Stranger here during the Carnival,
  Who makes a Figure here by industrious Gaming.
  As for _Alonzo_, he was born at _Venice_,
  Of noble Parents; his Estate, a large one----
  Even from his Youth you had his amorous Wishes,
  And as he grew in Years his Love increas'd:
  You lov'd him too----Nay, which is more, your Father
  Approv'd your mutual Loves, and at his Death
  Bequeath'd you to _Alonzo_.

  _Aur._ Oh! my _Florella_, thou hast rouz'd a Thought,
  Which will for ever break _Aurelia_'s Rest.
  I know my Father's Tenderness to me
  Made him confirm _Alonzo_'s Suit, for then
  I lov'd _Alonzo_----
  But were my gentle Father still alive,
  I'm sure he would not cross my Inclinations,
  But, Oh! name not my Father; I cannot bear
  The sad Remembrance of so great a Loss.               [_Weeps._

  _Flor._ But fear you not t'offend his peaceful Ghost,
  By breaking with the Man he destin'd yours?

  _Aur._ 'Tis not my Fault: and just Heaven must forgive
  What Heaven decrees----Yes, 'tis my cruel Stars
  That made my Heart inconstant to _Alonzo_,
  'Tis with Regret I break my plighted Faith;
  In vain I strive to check my new-born Love,
  I cannot, cannot live without _Bassino_.

  _Flor._ Madam, I wish your Passion ne'er prove fatal,
  But much I fear this inauspicious Match.

     _Enter_ Bassino, Armando.

  _Aur._ May Heaven avert th' unlucky Combination
  Of our presaging Thoughts: For, know, I tremble too--
  But here's the man that will dispel my Fears.

  _Arm._ to _Bass._ My Lord, remember
  To keep your Resolution.

  _Bass._ to _Arm._ Yes--I will keep it--[To _Aur._] Madam,
  you will pardon
  A Morning Visit, when you know what Reasons
  Press'd me to fix it on this early Hour.----
  By Letters from the Court I was last Night
  Commanded to return with Speed to _Turin_,
  And thence let out for _France_, to represent
  My Sovereign Liege in solemn Embassy.
  This Day I must prepare to take my Journey,
  Tho' 'tis with killing Grief I leave my dear,
  My fair _Aurelia_----[To _Arm._] Now, my _Armando_.

  _Arm._ My Lord, 'tis well: But still be on your Guard,
  The dreadful Shock comes on----

  _Aur._ This Day be gone! What means my Lord! Oh! Heaven,
  My boding Fears are come to pass: I see
  A Cloud of Woes just ready to o'erwhelm me.
  Is't possible! how can that Form divine
  Harbour such Treachery! Is then _Bassino_ false?
  Say, perjur'd Man, how often did you swear
  This happy Day should make you mine for ever!
  How can you now forget your solemn Vows?
  Why have I met with this inhuman Usage?

  _Bass._ Madam, my Prince's Orders
  Are absolute: My Honour is concern'd.

  _Aur._ Must a vain Title be preferr'd to Love?
  But no--You never lov'd----'twas base Deceit.
  Curs'd, curs'd dissembling Men! Their flattering Tongues
  Can feign a Passion that will look like Love,
  Till by Degrees they get us in their Power;
  Then with bold Impudence they draw the Vizor,
  And shew the Cheat that mock'd our credulous Hopes.
  Faithless _Bassino_,
  How oft you swore your Love could ne'er expire:
  How oft you swore one Smile of mine had Charms,
  Even above the Glories of a Crown.
  Those were the Oaths I fondly did believe;
  Those Words convey'd a Poison to my Heart,
  And even now I feel its mighty Force:
  My Head turns giddy, and my trembling Knees
  Betray their sinking Burden----
  Alas! I faint, I die----
                  [_She faints_, Bassino _runs and embraces her_.
  _Bass._ Oh! stay, my Love, my Life, my Soul, my all:
  The Conflict's past, and I am thine again,
  But she is breathless! Oh! ye rigorous Gods,
  Give back her Soul, or let my own be plung'd
  To dark _Elysium_----Oh! my dear _Aurelia_!        [_Hugs her._

  _Arm._ Is this your Resolution? By Heaven, I blush
  To call you Friend. Your Wife, my Lord, remember
  Your Wife----

  _Bass._ Curse on that Name----
  Urge me no more to follow your Chimeras,
  Lest you oblige me to break off that Friendship
  You blush to own----Oh! my _Aurelia_!

  _Arm. aside._ How sweet is treacherous Vice! how eagerly
  Fond Man pursues his Ruin!
  All Arguments were vain----yet still one Way remains,
  Which cannot fail, to stop the Progress of this impious Love.
  His Wife, by my Direction, comes to _Venice_:
  Her Sight will soon awake his slumbering Virtue,
  At least it will retrieve _Aurelia_'s Senses.  [_Exit_ Armando.

_Aur. recovering._ Where am I? Where's my Lord, my false _Bassino_?

  _Bass._ Here, here, my Soul, my charming Dear.

  _Aur. thrusts him off._ Hold off--Approach me not--urge not my Rage,
  Or with this Dagger I'll revenge my Wrongs
  On thy perfidious Heart----But, oh! his
  Heart's too hard,
  Even for temper'd Steel--Therefore I'll sheath it here.

      [_Offers at her Breast_: Bassino _snatches the Dagger, and
      throws himself at her Feet in a distracted Manner_.

  _Bass._ Oh! hold----forbid it Gods!
  I am the Cursed Cause, and I must die.
  Oh! who could bear my Load of mortal Woe!
  Ye heavenly Powers bestow the Stroke of Grace,
  And rack _Bassino_: Let your vengeful Thunder
  Now crush my guilty Head----Or thou, Oh! Parent Earth,
  Open thy Bosom, and conceal my Crime.      [_Tears the Ground._

  _Aur._ Is he then mine again!                    [_Falls down._
  Look up, my Lord, my Love, my Life!
  My dear _Bassino_! 'Tis _Aurelia_ calls.
  Let me for ever fold thee in my Arms,
  And beg thoul't never speak of parting more.   [_Embraces him._

      _Both rise and embrace in an Extasy._

  _Bass._ Oh! never, never----
  The Poles shall meet, the Sun and Moon invert
  Their wonted Motion e're I part from thee.
  I fondly try'd how much I was belov'd,
  And since you're true, my Bliss is now compleat.

  _Aur._ Was't but a Trial? then my Griefs are vanish'd,
  And I am lost in Joy----_Bassino's_ mine.
                                           [_They embrace again._

  _Bass._ Thine, thine for ever: And this happy Day,
  Shall end _Aurelia_'s Fears----Ha----
  This Day, said I, but where's _Placentia_ then?
  My Wife _Placentia_! Little does she think
  What Baseness I intend--Oh! racking Thought!
  But 'tis resolv'd, I'll change nor think no more:
  I'll try to plunge, and reach the blissful Shore;
  And if I sink, yet still this Hope's my Friend,
  I'll snatch my Treasure e're my Course I end.         [_Aside._

  _Aur._ My Lord, what makes you pause?

  _Bass._ The ravishing Thoughts of mighty Joys to come
  Kept me in Extasy and made me dumb;
  When on thy snowy Breast dissolv'd I lie,
  What Monarch can there be more blest than I?
                 [Bassino _leads her off with a languishing Air_.

      _Enter_ Alonzo.

  _Alon._ Sure, if my Eyes deceive me not, I saw
  _Aurelia_ with the Count just parting hence:
  Dissolv'd in Love, and languishing they seem'd.
  Damnation----
  I cannot bear the Thought--I'll after 'em.

      Alonzo _going_. _Enter_ Florella.

_Flor. aside._ Ha----_Alonzo_ here! I must prevent a Discovery.

_Alon._ _Florella_ here! she comes opportunely----she may inform me of
what I yet but fear----Good-morrow, _Florella_: How fares my Love, my
dear _Aurelia_?

_Flor._ Signior, Good-morrow; you are an early Visitant.

_Alon._ Not for a Man in Love; but answer me, How does _Aurelia_?

_Flor._ Well in Health----Only she's now and then in a little Fit of
Melancholy, such as usually proceeds from timorous Doubts about that
dreadful State of Matrimony. You know the Time draws nigh that gives
her to your Arms.

_Alon._ By Heaven! 'Tis an Age, there's six Days yet to come.

  _Flor._ An Age, indeed, if he knew all.               [_Aside._

  _Alon._ But haste, _Florella_; lead me to my Dear,
  She only can contract that tedious Age
  Of lingring Pain, and sooth it with her Smiles.
  Say, is she alone?

  _Flor._ Yes----No----
  Oh! Heaven! What shall I say?                         [_Aside._
  She, she's a----

  _Alon._ Ha----What means this faultering Answer?
  All's not right, and my Suspicion's true.

_Flor._ Signior, my Lady is not drest, and I shall displease her, in
admitting even you, without her Leave.

  _Alon._ Ha----not drest----Take heed you mock me not;
  Nor think to blind me with your feign'd Excuse:
  For in your guilty Face I read the Truth.
  Come, tell me who's with her? is't not _Bassino_?

  _Flor. aside._ Oh! Heaven! What shall I say?

  _Alon._ Nay, nay, no Study: Lying will not do:
  I saw 'em part from hence, just now I saw 'em.
  Harkee, sweet Mistress, how long have you practis'd
  This subtle Trade? I find you're much improv'd.
  Hell and Damnation----quickly, tell me
  What did _Bassino_ give for his Admittance?
  I'll double the Reward--but she's not drest for me----
  Oh! damn'd, damn'd Sex!

  _Flor._ Signior, what do you mean?

  _Alon._ To see _Aurelia_----see her instantly----
  Nay by Heaven! I will: All Opposition's vain:
  For by th' avenging Power of Love I swear,
  Tho' in _Bassino_'s Arms, I'll drag her thence,
  Only to cast her from my Sight for ever:
  Nor shall he live to triumph in my Shame.
  What tho' the Marriage Rites be not perform'd,
  Yet I may call her Wife. Her Father gave her to me:
  And her own Vows have fix'd my Heart in her's.
  Must then _Alonzo_ be deny'd Admittance,
  Under that poor Pretence that she's not drest?
  Whilst base _Bassino_ lies dissolv'd in Pleasures
  On her perfidious Breast----Oh! killing Thought!
  She makes my Name of Husband infamous,
  Even before the Priest has join'd our Hands.
  I'll in, and if th' Affront I tamely bear,
  May Heaven deny me at my latest Prayer.              [_Exeunt._


SCENE IV. Ludovico's _Lodgings_.

Ludovico _solus_.


_Lud._ Who waits?

      _Enter_ Mountaine.

_Mount._ Did you call, Sir?

_Lud._ _Mountaine_, run to Signiora _Ronquilla_, and tell her I have
done with her for ever, if she does not send this Evening the hundred
Ducats she promised to lend me----And harkee, as you come back,
acquaint Signiora _Cornara_ I shall be busy To-morrow, and desire she
will put off her Visit till another Day.

      [_Knocking at the Door._

_Mount._ Sir, there's somebody at the Door.

_Lud._ See who 'tis.

_Mount._ Sir, a Gentlewoman desires to speak with you.

  _Lud._ A Gentlewoman! admit her----Well,
  'Tis a great Fatigue to oblige the whole Sex.

      _Enter_ Lucy.

  Oh! what News from your Lady?

_Lucy._ This will inform you, Sir. [_Gives him a Letter._

_Lud. reads._ Hum, hum, a Letter----_Tho' it may seem improper for
one of my Sex to make the first Step in an Amour, yet you ought to
consider, that the rigorous Confinement we are under all the Year
round, may, in some Measure, excuse the Liberties we take during the
Carnival. If you have the Courage to meet me, I shall be at four
in the Afternoon in the_ Piazza d'Espagna, _invisible to all but
yourself_.----Well, I believe all Women in _Venice_ are wild for
Gallants.

_Lucy._ Sir, what Answer shall I return to my Lady?

_Lud. aside._ Egad----I am in Doubt whether I shall throw my Time away
on this Intrigue or no----Harkee Child, step into the next Chamber,
and I'll answer your Message instantly---- [_Exit_ Lucy.

Let me see----[_Reads in his Table-Book_] _Monday_, at Two in the
Afternoon, I am to meet Signiora _Belleza_ at her Nurse's----She's
a pretty Rogue, and so I'll go--At Three of the Clock, Signiora
_Dorinda_, the Senator's Wife, at the _Indian_ House----Pshaw, she's
an old Acquaintance,----I shan't go----At half an Hour past Three, the
Countess _Wrinkle_, who presented me with a Gold-hilted Sword----Silly
Fool! does she think I'll bestow one of my Visits on an old shrivelled
Piece of Antiquity, for a trifling Present, not worth above three-score
Pistoles----At a Quarter past Four, my Semstress _Dorothy Steenkirk_,
who supplies me with Linen,--Oh! this Visit may be put off for a new
Intrigue--And so I'll acquaint the Messenger. [_Exit_ Ludovico.

_The End of the First Act._




ACT II. SCENE I.

_A Chamber in Signior_ Pizalto's _House_.

_Enter Lady_ Pizalta, Lucy.


Lady _Piz._ Did you deliver my Letter to _Ludovico_, _Lucy_?

_Lucy._ Madam, I did; I found him in his Study, reading the Lover's
Watch, which he swears does not at all agree with his Constitution.
He hates Injunctions of Love, like those of Penance: For the one, says
he, is no more pleasurable to the Body, than the other beneficial to
the Soul.

L. _Piz._ What a fine Gallant I'm like to have with these Principles!
Well----what did he say to a Summons from a Woman of my Quality? Did
it not make him wish the Time of Assignation were sooner than the
Appointment in the Letter?

_Lucy._ He first hum'd over your Billet; and pausing a while, he
desired me to stay for an Answer in a next Room; then coming to me, he
ask'd me what Countrywoman you were? For, said he, if she should prove
an old Acquaintance, I would use her damnably--But when I had assured
him you never saw the Outside of these Walls, he began to have that
Desire which all Men have to a new Face.

L. _Piz._ Very well; and what then?

_Lucy._ He strait enquir'd whether you were black, brown, fair, old,
young, Maid, Wife, or Widow? I told him you was a wretched Wife to an
old, impotent, rich, covetous, noble _Venetian_; beautiful, young,
generous, and of a fair Complexion. He hugg'd me at these Words,
seem'd transported with the News, and swore that in Intrigues a Wife
was most suitable to his Temper; for, said he, there's neither
Children to father, nor Honour to repair: And where his Pocket and
Liberty are safe, he is contented to venture his Body and Soul.

L. _Piz._ Excellent Maxims!

_Lucy._ In short, Madam, he says he has had several Bills of this
Nature drawn upon him of late, and how much his Stock may be exhausted,
he knows not; but however he'll meet you, and if he cannot answer
your Expectation, he'll give you Earnest.

L. _Piz._ You talk merrily, Girl; I hope you did not tell my Name. I
should be loath to trust a Man of his Character with my Reputation at
first Dash.

_Luc._ No, Madam, I only told your Quality.

L. _Piz._ That's well: Oh! Reputation, what several Sorts of Slavery
do we undergo to preserve thee! for to be thought virtuous, we are
forced to be constantly railing against Vice, tho' our Tongues and
Maxims seldom agree.

_Lucy._ Alas! Madam, that Pretence is grown too common: For the Men
now take it for granted, that a Lady is very near surrendering, when
once she holds out that Flag of Defiance.

L. _Piz._ Well--Men use us very barbarously: They will neither suffer
us to be honest, nor allow us to be thought so----Here, take this Key,
and secure every thing that concerns my Reputation: And if my Husband
wakes ere I come back, you may easily find some Excuse to prevent his
Enquiries: for the Carnival allows us more Liberty, than at other
times we dare pretend to----I know thy Honesty, and will rely upon't.

_Lucy._ Yes, indeed, Madam, I am honest at the Bottom.

L. _Piz._ Well, I'll be gone: 'Tis about the Hour. [_Ex._ L. _Piz._

     _Enter_ Pizalto.

_Lucy._ Good Luck attend you, Madam----Oh! Heavens! here's my
Lord----Madam, Madam, Madam----Oh! Lord, what shall I say, now she's
gone?

_Piz._ Hist, hist, _Lucy_: Don't, don't, don't call your Lady, for I
have a Word or two to say to thee in private, and have waited for this
lucky Opportunity a great while----

_Lucy, aside._ Now _Venus_ be prais'd. I hope he has found some
Business of his own, that may give my Lady an Opportunity to mind
her's.

_Piz._ Well, _Lucy_, well,--canst thou guess my Business now?

_Lucy._ No, indeed, Sir--But I'm certain, an old Man's Business can't
be great. [_Aside._

_Piz._ [_Gives her a Looking-glass._] Here, Child, this will tell
thee--Look in't, look in't, I say----Ah! ah! thou hast a pretty
pouting Lip, a delicate roguish Eye, such an Ogle, such a Cast----Ah!
Rogue----Faith, thou'rt very pretty: And, in short, if any one rival
thy Lady, it will be thee, _Lucy_----Egad, I have Fire in me, yet.

_Lucy, aside._ O' my Conscience, and little too. I believe: Yet I wish
he has enough to serve my Ends. I'll make my Fortune----Lord, Sir,
what do you mean? I rival my Lady! Heaven forbid; I would not injure
so good a Woman for the World----

_Piz._ Pshaw, pshaw--Where's the Injury done to her, Child? Adod, I'll
give thee a hundred Crowns.

_Lucy._ No Injury, say you, my Lord? Why, I wonder you should be so
jealous of my Lady, and preach such religious Maxims to her, when your
own Principles are quite opposite.

_Piz._ Look ye, Child, a Man may do that, which would look abominable
in a Wife----A Woman's Reputation is a nice Thing----

_Lucy._ 'Tis so----and therefore 'tis but Reason I should take Care of
mine.

_Piz._ Prithee, no more of that: Thy Reputation shall be safe; I'll
marry thee to my Gentleman.

_Lucy._ Gentleman--Valet! Faugh--And what Good will a hundred Crowns
do me, when my Virginity is gone? Indeed, if you lov'd me as much as
you say, and would make my Fortune, (for I should love extreamly to be
a Lady) I cannot tell how far you might persuade me----I know my
Reputation would be safe in your Hands.

_Piz._ Make thy Fortune! Why, I've known some of our Nobles marry a
Wife with less than a hundred Crowns----But adod, thou'rt a charming
Girl, and therefore I'll make it a hundred Pistoles--What say'st thou
now, _Lucy_? Ah! adod, I must buss thee; [_Kisses her._] Ah! Rogue,
methinks I'm a young, lusty, vigorous Fellow again----Thou shalt find
I am, Girl.

_Lucy, aside._ I believe I shall fail you, old Gentleman. Well, my
Lord, make it up a thousand Pistoles, and I am your's else I'll die a
Maid, I'm resolv'd.

_Piz._ A thousand Pistoles, why thou art the most unconscionable Wench
in _Italy_: Why, 'tis a Price for a Duchess in some Countries. Come,
come, prithee be reasonable, _Lucy_?

_Lucy._ Reasonable! why you don't ask a reasonable Thing----Look you,
you know my Mind, I'll not bate a Penny----I'll warrant my Lady will
give me two hundred at least for my Discovery. [_Going._

_Piz. aside._ Udslife! she won't tell my Wife, sure, I'm ruin'd if she
does; I'd rather give her two thousand----Hold, hold, _Lucy_, sweet
_Lucy_, prithee come back----Faith, thou'rt so charming, I can deny
thee nothing----Come, it shall be what thou wilt----Come now, Rogue,
let's retire to thy Chamber----

_Lucy._ Nay, nay, no ent'ring the Premises, till you have paid the
Purchase----

_Piz._ Adod, thou'rt a Wag----Come in then, and I'll discharge the
Debt: Thou'rt a cunning Gipsy. [_Exit_ Pizal.

_Lucy._ You shall have Reason to say so, e're I have done with you,
old Gentleman----For I am resolv'd to shew you a Trick, and preserve
my Virtue. [_Aside._

  _For did base Men within my Power fall,_
  _T' avenge my injur'd Sex, I'd jilt 'em all._
  _And would but Women follow my Advice,_
  _They should be glad at last to pay our Price._
                                                    [_Exit_ Lucy.


SCENE II.

_The_ Piazza d'Espagna _in_ Venice.

_Enter Lady_ Pizalta _sola_.


  L. _Piz._ Not come yet! ungrateful Man! must a
  Woman of my Quality wait?
  How have we lost our Pow'r since the Creation?
  When the whole World had but one single Lord,
  Whom every Creature readily obey'd?
  Yet he, that mighty he, caught with a Smile,
  Flew to th'Embraces of the tempting Fair.
  But now each puny Sinner dares to cross
  A Woman's Inclinations----

      _Enter_ Ludovico.

  Oh! are you come, Signior? I suppose you have
  Some other Assignation, that made you miss
  My Hour----Pursue it pray----I'll not interrupt you--
  Your Servant----                                      [_Going._
  I hope he'll not take me at my Word.                  [_Aside._

_Lud._ Nay, nay, Signiora, why this Passion? [_Stops her._
You sent me a Challenge, and I, like a Man of Courage, am come to
answer it----Pray don't let a Quarter of an Hour break Squares----I
own it was a fault to make a Lady wait; but Friends, Madam, Friends
and good Wine are the Devil----Come I'll make you amends.

L. _Piz._ Friends and good Wine! I suppose those Friends were Female
ones----

_Lud._ No, Faith: You shall judge of that----But suppose they were----Why
should you be angry that I did not fly with the desired Haste, as long
as I am come time enough to give you Satisfaction----Besides, I han't
seen your Face yet, and for aught I know, it mayn't reward my Complement
in coming now----Prithee, Child, unmask, and then I'll tell thee more
of my Mind.

L. _Piz._ The Devil take this Fellow----and yet methinks I love him
for his Indifferency----[_Aside._] You talk as if you were unskill'd
in the Art of Love: Don't you know that Expectation feeds more than
twenty tasted Pleasures?

_Lud._ Hum----some Sort of Fops it may: But I'm none of those----I
never give my Opinion of a Dish till I've tasted; neither do I care to
dine often on one Sort of Meat without changing the Sauce----But when
that Cloud's withdrawn, how long I shall keep my Resolution I know
not.

L. _Piz._ Say you so! Why then the only Way to preserve your Appetite
is to feed you slenderly; or only let you see the food, but not to
taste.

_Lud._ Faith, Madam, I'm no Camelion, but Flesh and Blood----Therefore
these Prescriptions are of no Use----One Sight of that dear charming
Face of your's, would be more obliging to your humble Servant.

L. _Piz. unmasks._ Well, Sir, what think you? Is there any thing in
this Face worth your Regard?

_Lud._ Ah! by Heaven, an Angel----Oh! Madam, now blame yourself for
my Neglect, for had you sent the Picture of her, in whom all those
Beauties center, I had in this Place waited the Coming of my Goddess,
or rather flown on the Wings of eager Love, to meet my Fair, tho' in
the Arms of ten thousand Dangers----Say, my charming Angel, do you
forgive me? But why do I ask? your Eyes assure me you do; at least I'll
force a Pardon from these dear, soft, ruby Lips. [_Kisses her in Extasy._

L. _Piz._ Hold, hold! been't so lavish----a sparing Gamester is the
likeliest to keep in Stock----whilst a profuse Hand at one Cast throws
all he has away.

_Lud._ To fear that, were to doubt your Charms, in which a Lover is
sure to find constant Supplies----But we lose Time----Let's retire to
my Lodgings, where I'll give thee the best Proofs of my Love I can?

L. _Piz. aside._ Well! He's a charming Fellow----Oh! how happy are
Wives in _France_ and _England_, where such as he swarm!

_Lud._ Come, Madam, come----Why, what do you mean by this Delay?
Consider I'm a Man, a mortal, wishing, amorous Man----

L. _Piz._ And consider I'm a Woman----

_Lud. aside._ Ay, ay: That I know: At least I hope to find you
such----or I would not be in such Haste----

L. _Piz._ And have a Reputation to preserve.

_Lud._ Oh! Lord, what a damn'd Turn's here? Reputation, say you? Egad,
I find all Women make Pretence to that mysterious Word. [_Aside._]
What! Are not you married, Madam?

L. _Piz._ Yes, what then?

_Lud._ Why then you have a Reputation to preserve--that's all.

L. _Piz._ All, Sir, yes, and all in all to me----Do you consider what
Country you're in, Sir?

_Lud._ Yes, Faith, Madam; and what Constitution I am of too.
I know Murder is as venial a Sin here, as Adultery is in some
Countries; And I am too apprehensive of my mortal Part not to avoid
Danger----Therefore, Madam, you have an infallible Security----if I
should betray you, I bring myself into Jeopardy, and of all Pleasures,
Self-Preservation is the dearest.

L. _Piz._ A very open Speaker, I vow.

_Lud._ Ay, Madam, that's best----Hang your creeping, cringing,
whining, sighing, dying, lying Lovers----Pugh! Their Flames are not
more durable than mine, tho' they make more Noise in the Blaze.
Sings:

  _Hang the whining Way of Wooing,_
  _Loving was design'd a sport._

L. _Piz. aside._ The Duce take me if this Fellow has not charm'd me
strangely----Well, the Carnival is almost over, and then must I be
shut up like a Nun again----Hey! Hoa! This Time will be so short----

_Lud._ Let's make the better Use on't then, my Dear. We will consider
when we have nothing else to do, but at present there's a Matter of
the greatest Moment, which I must impart to you----Therefore, come
dear Rogue, come----

L. _Piz._ [_Looking on her Watch._] Hold----I have outstaid my Time,
and must return Home instantly, to prevent Discoveries.

_Lud._ Faith, Madam, this is not fair----to raise a Man's Expectation,
and then disappoint him! Would you be serv'd so yourself now?

L. _Piz._ I'll endeavour to disengage myself from my jealous Husband,
and contrive another Meeting.

_Lud._ But will you be sure to meet me again?

L. _Piz._ I give you my Hand as a Pledge----

_Lud. Kisses it._ And I this Kiss in Return----Adieu, my Charmer.

L. _Piz._ Signior, farewel. [_Exeunt severally._

      _Enter_ Bassino, Alonzo.

  _Bass._ Well, Sir, your Business----

  _Alon._ It is to tell you----
  You are a Villain.

  _Bass._ Ha----

  _Alon._ And that as such
  I ought to have treated you before the Face
  Of false _Aurelia_----But I scorn to follow
  The barbarous Custom of my native Country.
  I seek with Honour to revenge my Wrongs;
  Therefore, Sir, draw----

  _Bass._ This Action speaks you noble--be likewise just,
  And let me know the Cause that moves your Anger.
  By Heaven I'd rather call you still my Friend,
  Than be your Enemy----Yet, if I wrong'd you,
  I'll give you Satisfaction----

  _Alon._ Trifler, away----Too well thou know'st the Cause;
  And now would'st sooth my Wrongs with Flattery,
  But my Resolve is fix'd as Heaven's Decrees:
  And one of us must fall----Let the Survivor
  Dispose of that base, false, perjur'd _Aurelia_,
  As both his Love and Honour shall direct.
  If my propitious Stars defend my Life,
  You shall not die alone----Th' adulterous Fair
  Shall bear you Company----Now draw.

  _Bass._ Oh! hold.
  One Moment hold, I must unfold this Riddle:
  Adulterous Fair, say you?

  _Alon._ Yes: She's my Wife.

  _Bass._ Ha----your Wife!
  Sure there's a Curse entail'd upon that Name.         [_Aside._
  What! your real Wife?

  _Alon._ If the Command of an expiring Father,
  And her own Vows can make her mine, she's so:
  Indeed the Marriage Rites are yet to come,
  Which slily she delay'd these two Months past,
  On slight Pretence of finishing the Time
  Of mourning for her Father----But 'tis plain,
  I was a Property to your base Love,
  And only design'd to fill up your Place,
  When surfeited you should return to _Turin_.
  Hell----Furies! Draw, or in my just Revenge,
  I'll pin you to the Earth----

  _Bass._ Oh! Woman! Woman!                             [_Aside._
  Yes, I will draw----But ere the fatal Stroke
  Is past Recal, I swear _Aurelia_'s Virtue
  Is clear and spotless, like _Diana_'s self:
  Nor was I prompted on this early Visit,
  But with Design to take my last Farewel,
  Having last Night receiv'd my Prince's Orders
  To haste to _Turin_----Therefore if I fall,
  I hope she'll meet with Mercy----Now come on.

  _Alon._ Hold, hold, my Lord; Oh! could I credit this,
  I would ask Pardon, and entreat your Friendship.

  _Bass._ 'Tis true, upon my Honour----
  But if you doubt my Words, I'm ready----
  Tho' I have Reason to decline this Combat,
  At least at present----Oh! _Placentia_!               [_Aside._
  Oh! my _Placentia_! why should I abuse thee?

  _Alon._ My Lord, you seem disturb'd----

  _Bass._ Oh! _Alonzo_! _Alonzo_!
  Should I acquaint you with my wretched Fate,
  You'd find that Life itself is grown a Burden,
  I cannot bear, since I can ne'er be happy.
  But 'tis a Story that must ne'er be told,
  Let it suffice, to settle your Repose,
  That _Turin_ holds the Cause of my Misfortunes.

  _Alon._ Then I am happy:                              [_Aside._
  My Lord, I wish 'twere in my Power to serve you,
  I'd do it as a Friend----

  _Bass._ Generous Sir, I thank you;
  As far as I am capable, I am _Alonzo_'s.        [_Exit_ Alonzo.
  Oh! Force of treacherous Love! to gain my End,
  I wrong a Wife, a Mistress, and a Friend.      [_Exit_ Bassino.

_The End of the_ SECOND ACT.




ACT III. SCENE I.

Aurelia's _Lodgings_.

_Enter_ Aurelia, Florella.


  _Aur._ Oh! how I tremble for my dear _Bassino_!
  Haste, fly, _Florella_, bring me News he lives,
  Or else expect to see thy Mistress die.

  _Flor._ Madam, be patient----
  Consult your Reputation, and consider
  That the least Noise you make on this Occasion,
  Reflects upon your Virtue----

  _Aur._ Away, away----Talk not of Reputation,
  When Love's in t'other Scale--But what can shock my Reputation;
  Heaven's my Witness, I ne'er lodg'd a Thought,
  For Count _Bassino_ that could wrong my Virtue.
  Perhaps the Gods pursue me with their Hatred,
  Because I break my Promise to _Alonzo_.
  But then, why did they not secure me his?
  Why must weak Mortals be expos'd to Passions,
  Which are not in our Power to subdue,
  And yet account for what they prompt us to?
  But I will think no more----Almighty Love,
  Now hear my last Resolve----if angry Heaven
  Refused to guard my dear _Bassino_'s Life,
  _Aurelia_ too shall fall, and leave his Murderer
  Accurst for ever----

      _Enter_ Alonzo.

  _Flor._ Oh! Heaven! where will this end?

  _Aur._ Ha----                                         [_Aside._
  The Gods have sent him to decide my Fate,
  How now! how dare you meet my angry View?
  Or think I'll e'er forgive the base Affront
  This very Day you offer'd to my Fame?

  _Alon._ Just Heaven refuses not a Penitent,
  Therefore I cannot think that fair _Aurelia_,
  Whose Charms are all divine, should fail in Goodness.
  Oh! let my Love atone for my rash Deed:
  The Count and I are Friends, why should _Aurelia_ be more severe?

  _Aur._ He lives, blest News!
  Do then rash Actions speak your Love to me?
  Must I in publick bear with your Insults
  Before I'm yours? what must I then expect
  When the strict Ties of Marriage shall confirm
  Your jealous Passions?
  No, you have taught me to avoid the Shelf
  I was just running on----know, base _Alonzo_,
  That from this Moment I resume my Freedom,
  I disengage you from your former Vows,
  And will henceforth be Mistress of myself.

  _Alon._ Ha----                                        [_Aside._
  This sudden Coldness has another Spring
  Than my rash Carriage----Oh! my jealous Fears;
  But I'm resolv'd to trace her winding Thoughts,
  And fetch the Secret forth----
  Madam, I hope you do but try my Love:
  I cannot think _Aurelia_ would be false.
  Besides, you can't recal what's register'd in Heaven.

  _Aur._ Then stay till we come there----There you'll have Witness.

  _Alon._ Witness!
  Oh! faithless, perjur'd Woman, can'st thou think
  Upon thyself, and bid me call my Witness?
  Yes, you are mine----By all the Gods you are.
  And shall there be a Power on this Side Heaven,
  To stop my Bliss? No----by my Love I swear.
  I now can guess at your perfidious Meaning,
  And tho' that cowardly Villain slily thought
  To blind me with a Tale his Guilt had fram'd,
  'Tis plain he is your Minion----yet wants Courage
  To own his Treachery.

  _Aur._ Detracting, slanderous Villain!
  How dare you treat me thus?
  Oh! for the Look of a fierce Basilisk,
  To punish this audacious Insolence!

  _Alon._ Marry thee! No----by Heavens, I'd rather
  Be rack'd to Death----And for thy vile Injustice,
  None shall enjoy thee, while this Sword is mine.
                                       [_Lays hold on his Sword._
  Nor shall your Lover 'scape, to serve your Lust,
  Till he has forc'd a Passage thro' this Breast.
                                         [_Points to his Breast._

  _Aur._ Oh! my _Bassino_.                              [_Aside._
  Oh! cruel Man! Are not you then contented
  To wreak your Spite on poor _Aurelia_?
  Why must your Rage involve the Innocent?
  Oh! let me fall your Passion's Sacrifice;
  Let my Blood wash the Stain you fix on me,
  But do not blast your Name with base Revenge.----

  _Alon._ By Heaven! she doats on him! Oh! cunning Woman!
  But this Pretence won't serve to save his Life;
  I'll not be caught again----No, _Syren_, no.
  _Bassino_ dies----Nor will I leave to Fortune
  The vengeful Stroke, but take a safer Way.

  _Aur._ Oh! Heaven!                                   [_Kneels._
  What Words shall I invent to soothe his Rage,         [_Aside._
  And save my dear _Bassino_? Oh! _Alonzo_.
  My once-lov'd Dear, will you not hear me speak?
  Oh! I conjure you by our plighted Loves,
  Whose Purity outshone the Stars above,
  Hear me this Time, then use me as you please.

  _Alon._ Oh! Woman, Woman!

  _Aur._ If e'er _Aurelia_
  So much as in her Thoughts did wrong _Alonzo_,
  May sudden Death pursue her perjur'd Steps:
  Heaven forgive                                        [_Aside._
  The Perjury, since I've no other way
  To save _Bassino's_ Life.----

  _Alon._ _Aurelia_, rise----                     [_Raising her._
  Oh! could I credit this, how happy were _Alonzo_!
  But something tells me that thou art forsworn;
  And yet thou seem'st as fair as Truth itself;
  How is it possible that Guilt can look
  With so divine a Face?


  _Aur._ Oh! kill me instantly: kill me, I beg you, kill me;
  Let me not linger out an Age in Pain,
  For such is every Moment of your Anger;
  I cannot bear to live in your Displeasure.

  _Alon._ By Heaven she's true----
  Hence frivolous Fears be gone----she's only mine.
  Come to my Breast, my bright _Aurelia_, come.  [_Embraces her._
  To that soft Shrine that holds that Sacred Image,
  Which triumphs o'er my Soul, and grasps it all,
  I knew my boundless Treasure, and the Thought
  Of losing thee had rais'd my Love to Madness.
  But now I'm calm--No more shall that fierce Passion,
  Rude Jealousy, disturb my peaceful Mind.
  Do but forgive the Faults my Rage committed,
  And you will find our Loves will grow the purer;
  Just as the Sky looks brighter when the Storm
  Is chas'd away, and _Phoebus_ smiles again.

  _Aur._ Since both have been to blame, let it suffice,
  We both repent, and will offend no more.

  _Alon._ Oh! never, never,
  I'll ne'er suspect you more--Only resolve me this--

  _Aur._ What is it?

  _Alon._ Why was _Bassino_
  Admitted to your View, and I denied?

  _Aur._ He came to take his Leave, and 't had been rude
  Not to admit a Man of his high Birth
  On this Occasion; nor was you denied,
  But thro' Woman's Fears of your Suspicions.
  She thought you would misconstrue the Count's Visit,
  As you have really done----I blam'd her for it,
  Indeed, this is the Truth--I hope _Alonzo_
  Believes me now----

  _Alon._ Believe Thee! Yes----As willingly as Martyrs
  A State of endless Joy.
  I will so love, my Dear, that all Mankind
  Shall look with Envy on our mutual Bliss.
  I'm like a Merchant tost at Sea by Storms,
  Who his last Course with Pray'rs and Toil performs;
  And the rich Cargo safely brought on Shore,
  He hugs it thus, and vows to part no more.     [_Embraces her._

  _Aur._ So in a flow'ry Mead a Serpent lurks,
  And the unwary Traveller surprizes,
  Where he suspects least Danger! Cursed Cheat.         [_Aside._
  Oh! that I could disclose the fatal Story!
  But it must never out----I beg, _Alonzo_,
  You'd leave me for a while, and rest secure,
  You have my Love----

  _Alon._ Then the bright Sun in all his circling Turn,
  Cannot behold a Man more truly happy,
  What you command, I readily obey.
  Farewel, my Dear.                               [_Exit_ Alonzo.

  _Aur._ Where art thou now, _Aurelia_?
  How wilt thou 'scape that dreadful Precipice,
  On which thou art hurried on by thy fatal Passion?
  With conscious Horror I deceiv'd _Alonzo_;
  I hate this base Treachery, but 'twas unavoidable:
  The Truth had been more fatal----
  More fatal!----No----For I must never wed
  My dear _Bassino_, whilst _Alonzo_ lives.
  Oh! the distracting Thought! what shall I do?
  Why! die _Aurelia_: That's the only Way,
  To keep thy Vows to both--Ha----die, said I?
  But whether then? who knows what Punishment,
  Just Heav'n prepares for guilty Souls like mine.
  But I must think no more, lest I grow mad with Thought,
  If there's a Power that guards us here below,
  Oh! look with pitying Eyes on poor _Aurelia_:
  Appease the Tumults of my anxious Fear,
  And load me with no more than I can bear.
                                     [_Exeunt_ Aurelia, Florella.


SCENE II. _Lady_ Pizalta's _Lodgings_.

_Enter Lady_ Pizalta, Lucy.


L. _Piz._ Well, thou'rt an admirable Girl! What would half the Ladies
in _Venice_ give for such a Servant?

_Lucy._ (_Aside._) Truly you have Reason to say so, for 'tis not the
first Intrigue I have manag'd for you----Oh! dear Madam, your Ladyship
does me too much Honour----But how do you like your new Servant,
Madam?

L. _Piz._ Oh! above all Men living, _Lucy_: He has the most bewitching
Conversation I ever met with----Say, is there no way to contrive a
second Meeting? For I'm impatient till I see the dear Man again----The
End of the Carnival draws near, which is indeed the End of Life to me:
For then must I be coop'd up with Age: Condemned to an eternal Coughing,
Spitting, Snoring and Ill-nature----Then let me make the best of
Life----since Hell cannot have a worse Plague in Store than I have
felt already.

_Luc._ Indeed, Madam, I pity you: And wish 'twere in my Power to
free you from this old wither'd Log, but tho' that's impossible,
yet I may do you some little Services to make Life's tedious Journey
pleasant----Let me see, I have it----What would you say now, Madam,
if I should contrive a Way to have your Lover in your own Chamber?

L. _Piz._ That were worth a King's Revenue----Speak, quickly, how,
how, good _Lucy_?

_Luc._ Why, thus: He shall put on my Cloaths, and in my Place attend
you.

L. _Piz._ Rare Contrivance! but my Husband, _Lucy_?

_Luc._ Oh! let me alone, Madam, to manage him: He is defective in
Sight, you know; and not mistrusting any thing, will not be over
curious: But if he should, I have a way to bring you off----My Life
on't----This Plot may be of Use to my design, I'll manage it with
care. [_Aside._

L. _Piz._ Oh! the Pleasure of hearing my Husband lie coughing and
calling me to Bed: And my answering him, I'm coming, Dear; and while
he imagines me in the next Room undressing, I'm happy in the Arms of
my _Ludovico_. Certainly there's as much Satisfaction in deceiving a
dull jealous Husband, as in getting a new Gallant; were it not grown
so common--each Tradesman's Wife must have her Gallant too----and
sometimes makes a Journeyman of the Apprentice e'er his Indentures
be half out----'Tis an insufferable Fault, that Quality can have no
Pleasure above the Vulgar, except it be in not paying their Debts.
Well, dear _Lucy_, I admire thy Contrivance----About it instantly----

_Lucy._ (_Aside._) About it instantly! is that all? I must have my
t'other Fee first.----I will, Madam; and you may expect your Lover
instantly. But, Madam, what's to be done with your brocade Night-Gown
you tore last Night? it can ne'er be mended handsomely.

L. _Piz._ Nothing to be done without a Bribe I find, in Love as well
as Law----Well, _Lucy_, if you manage this Intrigue with Care and
Secrecy, the Gown is yours.

     _Enter_ Page.

_Page._ Madam, my Lord desires to speak with you.

_Lucy._ Madam, I'll go about your Business: Your Ladyship's very
humble Servant. [_Exit_ Lucy.

L. _Piz._ Tell him I'm coming----[_Exit_ Page.] Now by way
of Mortification, must I go entertain my old jealous Husband.
[_Exit Lady_ Pizalta.


SCENE III. _The Piazza._

_Enter_ Ludovico _singing_.


    _Give me but Wine, that Liquor of Life,_
  _And a Girl that is wholesome and clean,_
    _Two or three Friends, but the Devil a Wife,_
  _And I'd not change State with a King._

      _Enter_ Lucy.

_Lucy._ What singing, Signior! Well you're a pleasant Gentleman----

_Lud._ Ah! my little female _Mercury_, what Message bring'st thou?
Ha----will thy Lady bless me with another Sight----Ha----How----When?
where? I am all in a Flame.

_Lucy._ Come along with me, Sir, I'll help you to an Extinguisher
presently.

_Lud._ If thou meanest thy Lady, with all my Heart--But I can tell
thee, she'll rather prove Oil, than what you speak of----But, say,
where am I to see my lovely Charmer?

_Lucy._ In her Chamber----

_Lud._ Good! But how the Devil can that be done?

_Lucy._ Nay, without the Help of a Conjuror, I assure you; if
you dare take me for your Pilot, I'll warrant you Success in your
Voyage----I'll set you safe in the Island of Love; 'tis your Business
to improve the Soil.

_Lud._ I warrant thee, Girl; do you but bring me there once, and if I
play not my Part, may I never more know the Pleasure of an Intrigue.

_Lucy._ Which, if I mistake not, is the streatest Curse can fall on
you----Well, you must suffer a small Metamorphosis: What think you of
personating me a little? That is, dressing in my Cloaths, and waiting
on your Mistress in her Bed-chamber--Ha----

_Lud._ Egad, I'm afraid I shall make but an aukward Chamber-maid, I'm
undisciplin'd in dressing a Lady's Head----

_Lucy._ Oh! Sir, your Commission won't reach so high as the Head:
I believe my Lady will excuse little Matters: You can undress, I
suppose.

_Lud._ Oh! the best and the quickest of any Man in _Venice_. But a
Pox on't--Can'st find no other way?----I, I, I,----I like Petticoats
in their proper Places, but I don't care to have my Legs in 'em.

_Lucy._ And so you resolve against it? Ha----

_Lud._ No, not absolutely resolve, Child: But--a----

_Lucy._ But what, Sir!

_Lud._ Nothing--I will follow thy Directions, whatever comes on't. Now
lead the way, for nothing suits better with my Humour than a Friend, a
Bottle, a new Mistress and a convenient Place. [_Exit_ Lucy, Ludovico.


SCENE IV. Pizalto's _Lodgings_.

_Enter_ Pizalto _with a Bond in his Hand_.


_Piz._ Well--My Wife's a fine Woman! a very fine Woman! But a Pox
she's a Wife still, and this young Jade runs in my Head plaguily:
Well----here 'tis under my Hand; a Thousand Pistoles----A great Sum
for a Maidenhead, as Maidenheads go now-a-days----Ah, had I been young
now.

  _A Fiddle and a Treat had bore the Prize away,_
  _But when we old Fools doat, they make us pay._

      _Enter_ Lucy.

Oh! are you come! Here, here, _Lucy_: Here's a Fortune for thee, worth
twenty Maidenheads, adod! I have not so much Money by me at present,
but there's Security. [_Gives her the Bond._

_Lucy._ Your Lordship's Bond's sufficient----Well, but that I am
satisfied my Reputation is safe with your Lordship, or twice the Sum
should not have prevail'd--Go to my Chamber, my Lord, I'll but step
and see if my Lady wants any thing, and I'll be with you instantly.

_Piz._ You won't stay, _Lucy_? Ah, Girl, buss thy Lady's Chucky; now,
do now----

_Lucy._ Oh! Lord! not here, we shall be discovered.

_Piz._ Well, thou art a cunning Sinner: make haste, _Lucy_, dost hear?
[_Exit_ Pizalto.

_Lucy._ You're in mighty Haste, old Gentleman! but I shall deceive
you,

  _My End is gain'd; I have my Fortune made,_
  _Man has not me, but I have Man betray'd._

_The End of the_ THIRD ACT.




ACT IV. SCENE I.

Armando's _Lodgings_.

_Enter_ Armando, Placentia.


  _Pla._ Oh! _Armando_!
  Thou more than Friend to the distress'd _Placentia_!
  Say, how shall I regain my lost _Bassino_,
  My false, perfidious Husband?                         [_Weeps._

  _Arm._ Dear Madam, moderate your Sorrow:
  Reserve those Tears to move _Bassino_'s Heart,
  Mine is all Pity: You may rest secure
  Of all the Arguments a Friend can use
  To bring him back to your endearing Arms.
  Virtue's not quite extinguish'd in his Breast,
  Therefore I hope the sight of bright _Placentia_
  Will rouze his slumb'ring Reason----

  _Pla._ Oh! _Bassino! Bassino!_
  Oh! wretched Woman! Oh! that I had dy'd
  E'er I had known him false: Then I were happy:
  And tho' contented with his second Choice,
  He with a pitying Sigh, perhaps, had grac'd
  My Memory----
  Oh! all ye Powers that virtuous Love inspire,
  Assist me now: Inform my vocal Organs
  With angel Eloquence, such as can melt
  His Heart of Flint, and move his former Kindness.
  (_Aside._) But if that fail, I will remove the Cause
  Of both our Woes----Yes, that happy Charmer,
  That Rival of my Love shall surely die.

  _Arm._ Doubt not of the Success; What Heart of Steel
  Could e'er resist such Beauty dress'd in Tears?

      _Enter a Servant._

  _Serv._ Sir, Count _Bassino_ enquires if you are within.

  _Pla._ Oh! Heavens! how I tremble!

  _Arm._ Lucky Opportunity----shew him up.
  Madam, be pleas'd to step into that Closet.
  Till I can sound the utmost of his Thoughts,
  And shew him naked to your secret View,
  Then when he's in the height of impious Passion,
  You like a Bolt from Heav'n shall rush on him,
  And strike his Folly dumb.

  _Pla._ Almighty Powers, whose providential Care
  Is ever kind to virtuous Innocence,
  Oh! help me now in this Extremity.           [_Exit_ Placentia.

     _Enter_ Bassino.

  _Bass._ How does my Friend _Armando_?

  _Arm._ My Lord, _Armando_'s well,
  And wishes you were so.

  _Bass._ Dost thou discover aught that gives thee Cause
  To doubt I am not well? Indeed I think
  I am in perfect Health----

  _Arm._ My Lord, I should be glad
  To find that Fever of your Mind abated
  In which I left you last----

  _Bass._ (_Aside._) I must dissemble now,
  Else I'll ne'er gain my Ends--my dear _Armando_,
  That Fever thou speak'st of, is now succeeded
  By a cold Ague-Fit: The bare Remembrance
  Of my unlawful Passion shakes my Soul.

  _Arm._ Such sudden Cures have often prov'd pernicious,
  And we have Reason to suspect a Wound
  Too quickly heal'd----

  _Bass._ Not when thou know'st what Balsam I applied.

  _Arm._ There's scarce a Balm for the deep Wounds of Love,
  Besides Possession, and I cannot think
  You have enjoy'd _Aurelia_.

  _Bass._ I swear I have not----
  But I enjoy my Reason, my free Reason:
  And who possesses that, can never cherish
  A Thought against himself: For such I call
  Whatsoever keeps me from my lawful Wife,
  My dear _Placentia_, to whose Arms I'll fly
  With all the eager Haste of a fond Bridegroom.
  There I shall revel in the virtuous Pleasures
  Of a chaste Bed--Oh! my Friend _Armando_!
  My dear _Placentia_'s Friend! can'st thou forgive?
  Indeed I'm penitent, and will offend no more.

  _Arm._ My Lord, these are the Words you spoke before:
  What greater Reason have I now to think
  You'll keep your Promise?

  _Bass._ Pride, Honour, Justice are come to my Aid,
  And Love too feeble to withstand 'em all,
  Has left the Field to my victorious Reason.
  Pride, with the Prospect of my future Greatness,
  Allures me to return with Speed to _Turin_,
  T'obey my Prince's Orders.
  Honour and Justice tell me I'm _Placentia_'s,
  And that _Aurelia_ is _Alonzo_'s Bride.
  To him she gave her Virgin Vows: Nay, more,
  To him her dying Father did bequeath her;
  He loves her too, and shall not be depriv'd:
  My Passion is subdu'd, and I'm resolv'd
  Myself to give _Aurelia_ to _Alonzo_.

  _Arm._ If this be true, then you are my Friend again:
  But how came you to learn _Aurelia_'s
  Engagement to _Alonzo_?

  _Bass._ I have it from himself, who an Hour since,
  With eager Fury sought to 'venge on me
  His injur'd Love, and challeng'd me to fight:
  I chose with Justice to defend my Life,
  And quit _Aurelia_, rather than to vanquish
  In such a Cause--_Alonzo_ strait embrac'd me,
  Call'd me his Friend, and vow'd I should not go,
  Till I had seen him join'd in solemn Marriage
  With bright _Aurelia_----This I readily granted.
  Canst thou believe me true?

  _Arm._ My Lord, I do believe you----
  And am o'erjoy'd to hear your Resolution:
  By Heaven! there's more Glory in subduing
  Our wild Desires, than an embattl'd Foe.
  Now do I wish his Wife had never come.                [_Aside._

  _Bass._ _Armando_, thou'rt my Friend, and on that Score
  I must desire you to repair to _Turin_,
  With all the Speed you can, to bear these Letters
  To our great Prince, and beg he will excuse
  My stay for three Days more----And here this Letter
  Bear to _Placentia_----speak to her the kindest
  The softest Things thy Fancy can suggest.
  I shall make good thy Promise----
  My dear _Placentia_! Oh! that she were here,
  Panting and warm within these longing Arms!
  'Tis a long Age since I did see her last!
  But come, my Friend, you must this Hour set forward.

  _Arm._ With all my Heart: But 'twill not be amiss,
  Before I go, to fix the Victory,
  Which conquering Virtue in your Breast has gain'd;
  And if what you pretend be real Truth,
  I have a welcome Present for _Bassino_.
  Madam, come forth----

      _Enter_ Placentia.

  _Bass._ What do I see! my Wife! This was a lucky Plot: [_Aside._
  Hypocrisy did ne'er befriend me more.
  This was not like a Friend--why should _Armando_
  Disturb her soft Tranquility of Mind,
  And give her ocular Proofs of my Disloyalty?
  Oh! my _Placentia_! my beloved Wife!           [_Embraces her._
  Oh! that I should e'er think to wrong my Dear!

  _Pla._ My Lord, waste not a Sigh on my Account:
  My Joys are infinite, since you are mine,
  And what is past I easily forget.
  Nay, let me beg for Pardon: For I know
  I have offended you in coming hither.
  I should have waited this Return of Virtue:
  Or, if abandon'd, silently have mourn'd
  My Loss, without upbraiding my lov'd Lord,
  All this I should have done, but mighty Love,
  Too powerful for Duty to withstand,
  Guided my Steps to _Venice_----
  In hopes my Presence would retrieve your Heart.

  _Bass._ Gods! that this Woman were _Aurelia_!         [_Aside._
  Thou Wonder of thy Sex! thou best of Women!
  I blush to think that thou hast heard my Folly:
  Yet since your Love cancels your just Complaints,
  You make me doubly blest: And I'll reward
  This excellent Goodness with eternal Fondness.
  Oh! that thou hadst been here! Not all the Beauties
  That _Venice_ holds could have diverted me;
  No, not one Moment from my dear _Placentia_.
  Long Absence is the Bane of new-born Love,
  But Fate shall ne'er have Power to part us more.

  _Pla._ Oh! my dear Lord, your Goodness is too great:
  And I'm o'er paid for all my Sorrows past.
  _Armando_, say, is not he wondrous kind?

  _Arm._ Madam, I told you Virtue
  Was struggling in his Breast; and that it might
  O'ercome his vicious Love, I thought your Presence
  Was requisite----And now, my Lord, I hope
  You will forgive me, since all the Endeavours
  I us'd before had been in vain. I once
  Design'd to let _Aurelia_ know your Marriage;
  But then perhaps she would not have believ'd me:
  Let this plead my Excuse in sending for _Placentia_
  Without your Knowledge.

  _Bass._ I must not let him see I am concern'd.        [_Aside._
  I know 'twas Friendship all, well-meaning Friendship:
  I only am to blame: But I'll retrieve
  My Credit in your Heart, and still deserve
  The Name of Friend--And thou, the best of Wives,
  Shalt ne'er have Cause to doubt my constant Love.

  _Pla._ Oh! my _Bassino_! this Excess of Kindness
  Exalts me o'er all Mortals, if you're true,
  There's not a Blast within the Power of Fortune
  Can shock my Happiness.

  _Bass._ Thou shalt ne'er find me false, I swear thou shalt not.
  Oh! that I could engage
  She would return to _Turin_ with _Armando_;           [_Aside._
  For if she stays, I never can enjoy
  My bright _Aurelia_, and by Heaven I will,
  Altho' ten thousand Lives should pay the Purchase.

  _Pla._ My Lord, you seem disturb'd.

  _Bass._ It troubles me
  You can't appear in _Venice_ with a Train
  That may bespeak the Rank you hold in _Savoy_.

  _Pla._ to _Arm._ Oh! _Armando_!
  He is so kind, I with I ne'er had come!
  What if I offer to return with you?

  _Arm._ Madam, you will do well;
  For I myself cannot suspect him now.

  _Pla._ My Lord, let not my Presence here disturb you,
  I doubt your Love no more, and to convince you,
  I will go back before 'tis known I'm here.
  Besides, 'tis fit I should prepare all things
  To welcome you at home.

  _Bass._ (_aside._) Blest Opportunity!
  Fortune I thank thee: Would my Dear then leave me
  So very soon? Alas! 'twill be an Age
  E'er I return to _Turin_: Three long Days!
  No, my Dear, no; I will not part from thee,
  At least this Night, my Love----

  _Pla._ Will then _Armando_ stay?

  _Bass._ No, my best Hopes, he instantly departs
  With Letters to my Prince.

  _Pla._ Then suffer me to go this very Moment.
  Three Days will soon be o'er, and your Return,
  Shall make me fully blest----If I should stay
  'Twould look like base Distrust, and I can't think
  _Bassino_ would be false----

  _Bass._ (_aside._) Oh! Heaven that I were not!

  _Arm._ Indeed, my Lord, I think you're truly happy.
  Scarce does any Age produce so good a Wife.

  _Bass._ Oh! that I could reward this wondrous Goodness!

  _Pla._ My Lord, what makes you sigh?

  _Bass._ To part from thee: But since 'tis your Desire,
  It shall be so. _Armando_, to thy Charge
  I here commit the Treasure of my Soul,
  Take Care of her, and think that on her Safety
  My Life depends.

  _Arm._ My Lord, I hope you do not doubt my Care.

  _Bass._ Dear Friend, I do not----
  May Heaven's Blessings still attend my Love,
  My dear _Placentia_. [_Embraces, and goes to lead her off._

  _Pla._ As many more guard my _Bassino_.

  _Bass._ (_aside._) A sudden Horror seizes all my Limbs:
  I tremble at the Thought of this base Deed----

      [_Pulls out his Handkerchief and drops a Letter, which_
      Armando _takes up_.

  Ha----Tears uncall'd for bathe my guilty Eyes----
  Gods! either give me Virtue to withstand
  This impious Love, or Courage to pursue it
  Without Remorse; for I'm but half a Villain.
                                      [_Exeunt_ Bassino, Placent.

_Arm. opens the Letter._ A Letter! and to _Aurelia_! now Curiosity
prompts me to know the Subject----What's here?

      Reads. _I have dispatch'd_ Armando _to the Court of_ Savoy,
      _and found Pretence to stay behind_----

 False treacherous Man!

      _This Night I give a Mask at my Lodgings, which, I hope,
      will divert_ Alonzo, _till the Priest has joined our Hands;
      and while all the Company are engaged in Mirth, I'll steal
      to the dear Arms of my divine_ Aurelia.

  Oh! Villain, Villain! Monstrous Villain!
  Oh! poor _Placentia_! But I will prevent
  His Policy, and break his wicked Measures.
                                                 [_Exit_ Armando.


SCENE II. Pizalto's _Lodgings_.

_Enter_ Pizalto _solus_.


_Piz._ Why, what makes this young Jade stay so long? Adod, this is to
pay before hand----Ha----methinks I hear a Laughing and Giggling in my
Wife's Apartment; I must know whence their Mirth proceeds. Ho! here's
_Lucy_ coming----Harkee you, pray, why did you make me wait so long?
Nay, I'm resolved you shan't escape me now----[_Goes to the Door, and
pulls in_ Ludovico _in_ Lucy'_s Cloaths, whose Commode falls off in
the Struggle, and discovers his bald Head_.] Oh! Benedicite! What have
we here? A Man disguis'd in my Wife's Chamber! and I unarm'd! Oh!
Curst Minute!----Speak, thou wicked Prophet, thou Son of Iniquity,
what camest thou here for? Ha----Thou Priest of _Baal_, to offer
Sacrifices on the Altar of my Wife? Oh! my Head! my Horns weigh it
down to the Ground already----Within there, bring me my Sword and
Pistols.

_Lud._ A Pox on all Petticoats----What a Devil shall I say now? Oh!
for a Sword! that would be of more Use to me now than my Tongue.

      _Enter Lady_ Pizalto.

_Piz._ Oh! thou wicked fallacious Woman!

L. _Piz._ What ails my dear Chucky? Why dost thou call for Arms,
Deary?

_Piz._ To cut down that vile Creeper which over-runs thy Garden of
Virtue----

L. _Piz._ [_aside._] Now Impudence assist me.

Ah! Heavens! What's here? A Man in Disguise? A Thief it must
be----Raise the Servants----Oh! Heaven! we might have had all our
Throats cut in our Beds----Now for _Lucy_, for I am at a Loss to
come off. [_Aside._

_Piz._ No, no, I warrant, you know he is more gentle in Bed.

_Lud._ [_aside._] Oh! the Devil, what does she mean? Death, Hell and
Furies! if I come off now, catch me at this Sport again, and hang
me----

      _Enter_ Lucy.

L. _Piz._ Oh! are you there. Mistress? How came this Man here in your
Cloaths? Ha! Gentlewoman--

_Lucy._ [_aside._] How confidently she asks the Question, poor Lady?
as if she knew nothing of it! Now must I bring her off--For Reasons
you must not know, Madam.

_Piz._ Ah! Thou wicked Pair of Bellows to blow the Fire of Iniquity!
Why, thou art the very Casement thro' which thy Mistress sucks the Air
of Abomination--Tell me, I say, how he came here, and for what----and
be sure it be a substantial Lie, or 'twill not pass.

_Lucy._ [_aside_] All my Hopes are in her Impudence.

_Lucy_ to _Pizal_. Harkee, Sir, one Word with you----Do you remember
our Agreement To-night?

_Piz._ Why, what of that? ha----

_Lucy._ Then imagine what I design'd that Gentleman for; I'm honest,
Sir, that's all----

_Piz._ I'm honest, Sir, that's all--[_Mimicking her Tone._] Honest!
with a Pox----What! and so you honestly provided a Companion for my
Wife in my Absence--ha----

_Lucy._ No, Sir, I design'd him for your Companion in my Absence----This
is the Business he was drest for: Therefore no more Words, but believe
my Lady honest, or all shall out.

_Piz._ Oh! the Devil! this shan't pass, Hussy----Do you think I'll be
cuckolded, jilted, bubbled, and let it pass for a _Christmas_ Gambol.
Adod, give me my Bond again, or----or---- [_Holds up his Cane._

_Lucy._ No----hold there, Sir: Women and Lawyers ne'er refund a fee:
But 'tis your best Way to be patient now, I'll not take Blows.

L. _Piz._ Why all this Whispering? Why mayn't I know the Business?

_Piz._ I am mistaken if you have not known too much Business already:
But I am right enough serv'd----I had more Ground before than I could
manage; I had no Need of my Neighbour's.

_Lucy._ Right, my Lord; Ground that lies fallow will breed Weeds in
Time; but you'rs is clear yet.

_Piz._ Damn your Jests; I shall expect a better Account, do you hear?
I'll find a Servant to see you out of Doors. [_To_ Ludovico.
[_Exeunt_ Pizalto _and Lady_.

_Lud._ Well, this was an admirable Lift at a Pinch--She has brought me
off now----And if e'er they catch me at this Music again, I'll give
'em Leave to make an _Italian_ Singer of me----No more Intrigues in
Disguise----if it had not been for the Waiting-Woman now, I might have
been hang'd for a Thief.

_Lucy._ What all amort, Signior, no Courage left?

_Lud._ Faith, not much----I think I have lost my Manhood with my
Breeches----This Transformation may suit with Gods, but not with
Mortals of my Humour----Come, prithee, good Mistress _Lucy_, help me
to my proper Shape again; for tho' I have a natural Inclination to
Petticoats, I hate 'em upon my own back. [_A Flourish of Music
Within._

_Lucy._ Hark! I hear Count _Bassino_'s Music: He gives a Mask
To-night; you are already drest for Masquerade, won't you stay and
take a Dance?

_Lud._ Egad, I'd rather dance a Jig with thee elsewhere: Faith thou'rt
a pretty Girl--and hast a good deal of Wit too----But then, Pox on't,
thour't honest, thou sayeth, thou cannot swallow a Pill, except 'tis
gilded over with Matrimony.

_Lucy._ And that turns your Stomach, I warrant.

_Lud._ Why, Ay: Faith my Stomach is damn'd squeemish in these matters:
Yet, egad, if I could find one with half as much Money as thou hast
Wit and Beauty, I'd marry, and live honest.

_Lucy._ That is, you'd marry her Money----

_Lud._ One with the other, Child: There's no living upon Love thou
knowest----Tho' Faith I could live well enough too.

_Lucy._ Well, suppose I help you to a Lady with a round Sum; you'd
keep your Word, and marry her?

_Lud._ I am a Gentleman, I scorn to break my Word.

_Lucy._ Well, Sir, come to the Mask, and I'll engage you a Mistress,
if you are not over-curious.

 _Lud._ With all my Heart:
    I'm now resolv'd to leave this Wenching-Trade;
  For no man's safe upon a Hackney Jade;
  Th' Allay of Danger makes the Pleasure Pain,
  A Virtuous Wife will always be same.


_The End of the Fourth Act._




ACT V. SCENE I.

_A Mask in_ Bassino_'s Lodgings_.

Bassino, Alonzo, Armando, _in a Disguise_; Placentia _in Man's
Cloaths, Signior_ Pizalto, _Lady_ Pizalta, Lucy, &c.

_An Entry of three Men and three Women of several Nations._

  _Bass._ I can't imagine where I dropt my Letter:
  Pray Heaven it be where none can ever find it.
  Gods! Let me once enjoy her, then call on me
  Your Store of Plagues, and I will meet 'em all.

      _Enter_ Ludovico, _singing_.

_Lud._ Ah! Mistress _Lucy_! I'm come thou see'st----I expect thou
shalt be as good as thy Word, Child----is the Lady here?

_Lucy._ The Lady is forth-coming, if you are still in the same Mind?

L. _Piz._ My Lover here! Harkee, _Lucy_.

_Lucy._ By and by, Madam, I am catering for myself now----Well, Sir,
will two thousand Pistoles do?

_Lud._ I must humour her----[_Aside._] Ay Child.

_Lucy._ Why then I take you at your Word, Sir, and can produce the
aforesaid Sum----[_To_ Piz.] With a little of your Assistance, My
Lord.

_Lud._ (_aside._) Hum----A pretty Wife I am like to have----Catch me
there if you can----

_Piz._ Ha----How's that?

_Lud._ How! Mistress _Lucy_, worth two thousand Pistoles?

_Lucy._ Ay: And I have a very good Pay-master for one Half of it
too--Do you know this Hand, my Lord? [_To_ Pizalto.] (_Shews the
Bond._)

_Piz._ (_aside._) Confound your jilting Sneer.

_Lud._ Ha, ha, ha----What, a thousand Pistoles a Dish, my Lord? I hope
you don't change often, ha----ha----

_Piz._ Hussy, I'll be reveng'd----'Tis all false, 'tis counterfeit.

_Lucy._ Ha--ha--But it had been current Coin, if I had suffer'd you to
put your Stamp upon't----in my Bed-chamber, my Lord----

L. _Piz._ How, Mistress, have you trick'd my Husband out of a thousand
Pistoles, and never told me of it?

_Lucy._ Nay, Madam, don't frown----Remember you have trick'd him out
of something too, which I never told him of--Don't urge me to more
Discoveries.

_Lud._ (_aside._) So----Here's Trick upon Trick: But, Faith, you shall
never trick me out of my Liberty. I'm not so fond of a Wife to marry a
Chamber-maid, tho' with ten Times as much Money: And so, sweet
Mistress _Abigail_, your humble Servant. [_Exit_ Ludovico.

L. _Piz._ (_aside.]_) The Jade has me upon the Hip--I must be silent.

  _She who has her Husband's Bed abus'd,_
  _Can ne'er expect she should be better us'd._            [Exit.

_Lucy._ Ha----What! my Lover gone! With all my Heart: Better now
than after; for whilst I have my Fortune in my own Hands, I must have
no Need to sue for a separate Maintenance, and get nothing for it
neither.

  _Arm._ to _Pla._ Now, Madam, go: May Heaven be propitious
  To your Designs: I'll stay and watch _Bassino_:
  And when he goes, will follow with _Alonzo_.

  _Pla._ Oh! my sick Fancy frames a thousand Forms,
  Which tell me that our Meeting will prove fatal.
  And warn me not to go, what shall I do?
  Must I bear calmly my _Bassino_'s Loss?
  Why do I tremble thus?
  Sure it can't be the Fear of Death----No, for if
  I go not I must lose him, and that's more
  Than Death to me----and if I go, I can but fall,
  And Life without him is the greater Woe,
  Therefore I'll on, I'll use the softest Words
  That Tongue can frame to sooth her into Pity,
  And dissuade her from this impious Marriage.
  If I succeed I am compleatly happy,
  If not, I'd rather die than live with Hate,
  But first, curst Rival, thou shalt share my Fate.
                                               [_Exit_ Placentia.

      _A Flourish of Musick._

  _Bass._ 'Tis now the Time----but whither do I go?
  Shall I a Maid, a Wife, a Friend betray?
  No matter----
  All Arguments are vain, where Love bears Sway.
                                                 [_Exit_ Bassino.


A SONG.

  _When the Winds rage, and the Seas grow high,_
      _They bid Mankind beware,_
  _But when they smooth and calm the Sky,_
      _'Tis then they would ensnare._

  _So the bright_ Thais _Kindness shows,_
      _By frowning on her Lovers,_
  _For Ruin only from her flows,_
      _When she her Charms discovers._

_Piz._ Come now, Gentlemen and Ladies, be pleas'd to walk into the
next Room, and take a small Collation--But where's my Lord _Bassino_?
Come, Gentlemen, he's gone before us.

_Arm._ Where we will quickly follow. (_Aside._) _Alonzo_, a Word with
you-- [_Exit Omnes_.


SCENE II.

_A Chamber in_ Aurelia's _House_.

_Two Arm-Chairs._ Aurelia _sola_.


  _Aur._ I wonder much at my _Bassino_'s Stay:
  Oh! Love! how swiftly fly thy Hours away
  When we are blest! How tedious are thy Minutes
  When cruel Absence parts two longing Lovers!

      _Enter_ Florella.

  Is my _Bassino_ come? speak----

_Flor._ No, Madam, a young Stranger desires to speak with you: He
says, you are not acquainted with his Name, but will soon with his
Business, which is something of great Import, that can be told to none
but yourself.

  _Aur._ A Stranger Business with me! I know of none
  I have with Strangers--Heaven! what's this?
  I feel a sudden Throbbing in my Heart,
  As if 'twas conscious of some fatal News--            [_Aside._
  Womanish Fears----Admit him--(_Exit_ Florella) it must be
  One of _Bassino_'s Friends, whom he intrusts
  To be a Witness of our Marriage Vows.

      _Enter_ Placentia, _in Man's Cloaths_.

  _Pla._ Madam, I was inform'd that Count _Bassino_
  Was to be here--and having Things t'impart
  That much concern him, I made bold to come----

  _Aur._ Sir, I expect him straight--if you're his Friend
  I will account you mine--Be pleas'd to sit.        [_Both sit._

  _Pla._ My Brother, Madam, is extremely happy
  In being favour'd by so fair a Lady----

  _Aur._ Your Brother, Sir! is then my Lord your brother?

  _Pla._ Madam, he is.

  _Aur._ Then I may call you Brother too;
  For all the solemn Vows of Love have pass'd
  'Twixt him and me--And blissful _Hymen_ waits
  With lighted Torch to tie the sacred Knot,
  Which shall be done this Hour----

  _Pla._ This Hour! say you? Oh! Madam, have a Care:
  You tread inchanted Ground, and e'er you know
  What Path you take, you're hurried to Destruction.

  _Aur._ Where lies the Danger?

  _Pla._ Oh! 'Tis a fatal Tale, yet you must hear it;
  Therefore summon your Courage to your Aid,
  For you will need it all, whilst I relate
  The fatal Story----

  _Aur._ Ah! how I tremble!
  Say, is he dead? has any murderous Villain
  Kill'd my _Bassino_?

  _Pla._ No--he is well in Health: but his distemper'd Mind
  Is of a wild and feverish Disposition,
  Longing to taste, what tasted will undo him.

  _Aur._ Your Speech is all a Riddle: Pray speak plainer:
  But yet, e'er you proceed, if Count _Bassino_ lives,
  I care not what must follow, since he's mine.

  _Pla._ No, he's not yours--Nor ever must.

  _Aur._ 'Tis false----There's not a Pow'r on Earth can part us:
  Perhaps,
  You think my Blood too base to mix with yours----
  But, Sir, your Brother loves me, and in Love
  All Ranks are equal----

  _Pla._ No----I wish that were all:
  But there's a greater Obstacle----He--is--married--
  Oh! Gods! unfortunately married!

  _Aur._ Married!

  _Pla._ Yes,----Married----to my Sister,
  To my unfortunate, abandon'd Sister.
  Oh! do not you conspire t'undo her quite;
  It is enough, she's false _Bassino_'s Wife.

  _Aur._ Gods! Married!
  And is it possible! Oh! faithless Men!
  Oh! Truth! Oh! Justice! Whither are you fled?
  Now all my Fears and Horrors are explain'd.

  _Pla._ I'm glad I reach'd this Place in Time, to hinder
  Those Ills that must have waited on your Marriage,
  Now it is in your Power, both to be happy,
  And, in some Measure, make my Sister so.          [_Both rise._

  _Aur._ A Paradox in Nature----Bid _Aurelia_
  Be happy, when you rob her of her Heaven!
  Her dear _Bassino_!
  Indeed your Sister may be counted happy,
  If she's his Wife--Ha--Wife--by Heaven! 'tis false--
  No, no--He has no other Wife but me----
  He is not married, you bely him basely----
  He cannot be so treacherous----

  _Pla._ Madam, I swear, whate'er I said is Truth--
  Do but defer this Marriage for a Day,
  And if I don't produce convincing Proofs,
  May all the Plagues a Woman can invent
  Fall on my perjur'd Head----

  _Aur._ Defer our Marriage--No, by Heaven I will not.
  I can't suspect him--Neither do I think
  You durst maintain this Story to his Face.

  _Pla._ Madam, I dare; nay, which is more, I'll die,
  Or vindicate my injur'd Sister's Honour----

  _Aur._ Bold Arrogance!
  Oh! That he were but here to answer the Affront!
  Perhaps he may have wrong'd your Family:
  Debauch'd your Sister; for which you would force him
  To marry her?----But, I must tell thee, Boy,
  He's mine already: nor would he forsake me
  To hold Command o'er all the Universe.

  _Pla._ Oh! Heaven! must I bear this!

  _Aur._ Nay, expect more, if he should find you here,
  'Tis not your being Brother to his Mistress,
  That will secure you from his just Revenge.

  _Pla._ Revenge! Nay, then away with all Disguise,
  Pity be gone----And in its Room fell Rage
  Take place, that I may dash that haughty Insolence
  That dares to treat me thus--Know, Madam,
  I am his Wife--his lawful wedded Wife.
  With borrow'd Shape I came to try your Virtue,
  Which I have found so light that the least Puff
  Of wanton Love will blast it----Else my Visit
  Had met a better Welcome--Here with Sword in Hand
  I'll wait his coming,                                 [_Draws._
  And as he enters, pierce thy haughty Breast.
  I know he loves thee, and therefore 'tis brave
  Revenge to let him see thy dying Pangs:
  Thy parting Sighs will rack him worse than Hell.

  _Aur._ His Wife! Oh! Insolence!
  In vain you waste your Breath, it moves not me:
  So much I love him, so much I'm belov'd,
  That should an Angel from yon Heaven descend,
  To tell me he's marry'd, I'd not credit him,
  Kill me if you dare--He will revenge my Death:
  That pleasing Thought gives Courage to my Soul:
  To live without him would be Death indeed!
  No--he'll ne'er leave me for a common Thing,
  For such I'm sure thou art----

  _Pla._ Common! Proud Wretch----by Heaven that Word gives Wings
  To my Revenge--Vile Creature, die--               [_Stabs her._

  _Aur._ Help,--Murder, murder----

      _Enter_ Bassino.

  _Bass._ Ha--That to thy Heart----[_Kills_ Plac.] Wer't
     thou a Demi-god
  And durst attempt this Shrine, thus should'st thou fall--

  _Pla._ (_Falling._) Oh! _Bassino_! Oh!

  _Aur._ Oh! hold, my Lord, what has your Rashness done?
  I only should have dy'd----I'll not upbraid
  Your Treachery--No, 'tis the Hand of Heaven
  That guides the Stroke that takes my guilty Life,
  For being faithless to _Alonzo_.

  _Bass._ Talk not of Death, my fair, my dear _Aurelia_;
  That very Sound does harrow up my Soul.
  But who art thou, whose sacrilegious Hand
  Durst to profane the Temple of my Love?

  _Pla._ I am your Wife--Your loving Wife _Placentia_.
  Oh! pardon this rash Deed; blame jealous Love--
  And grace me with a Sigh, that I may die contented.

  _Bass._ My Wife! and kill'd by me!
  Under what Load of Miseries I stand!
  Oh! Horror! Horror! Infinity of Guilt!
  Hurl now your vengeful Bolts, Almighty Powers,
  On my devoted Head!
  Oh! I have wrong'd you both: Deceiv'd you basely:
  Thus prostrate on the Ground, let me beg Pardon:
                                 [_Throws himself on the Ground._
  I do not ask it with Design to live.

  _Aur._ Oh! dear _Bassino_ live:
  And try to save her, for she's innocent:
  We only are in Fault----
  I urg'd my wretched Fate with impious Language,
  For which I beg Forgiveness: Generous Lady,
  Let not my Soul depart with Guilt opprest.

  _Pla._ As I forgive you, so may Heaven me.

  _Bass._ Oh! _Placentia_! Oh! my Wife!

  _Aur._ One thing more, and I'm happy----
  Were but _Alonzo_ here, that I might ask
  Forgiveness for my Falshood! But, alas!
  My Spirits faint within my frozen Veins,
  And every Thing seems double to my Sight:
  Oh! How I dread the uncertain future State!

  _Bass._ Unhappy Maid! Oh! my once dear _Aurelia_!
  Curst, Curst _Bassino_! Oh! my Wife! How dare
  I stand the View of both these injured Women!
  Oh! Heaven! Why name I Heaven! Heaven will not hear
  A Wretch like me----No, even Hell wants Torment
  Proportion'd to my Guilt--Oh! my _Placentia_! Oh!

  _Pla._ Oh! my dear Lord, I cannot see you thus:
  Live, live, my Lord; be happy when I'm dead.
  Nay, for your Sake, I with _Aurelia_ too
  May live to make you happy----

  _Bass._ Oh! Hold!
  Heap not more Curses on me by your Kindness;
  I wish that she might live, but not for me.
  Only to clear me from her guilty Blood----
   Oh! _Placentia_!

  _Pla._ Rise, my Lord, rise: Do not indulge your Woe,
  Your Sighs atone for all, and make e'en Death a pleasure----
  I see him coming, he will soon be here----

  _Bass._ No, I will never rise: ne'er see the Day.
  The Sun would blush to shine on such an impious Wretch.
  Here let me lie, and tear with these curst Hands
        [_Tears the Ground in a distracted Manner._
  A Passage thro' the Earth, and hide my Face for ever.

  _Alon._ (_Within._) Where where's this Villain? Where's _Bassino_?

  _Aur._ 'Tis _Alonzo_'s Voice.
  Oh! fly, my Lord, fly from his just Revenge.

      _Enter_ Alonzo _hastily_.

  _Bass._ Fly----
  Where shall I fly from Justice? No, Heaven is kind
  In sending him to help my Journey forward.

  _Alon._ Where's _Bassino_?

  _Bass._ (_Rising._) Here Sir, I stand.

  _Alon._ Then there stands a Villain----Ha--what
  Do I see!----_Aurelia_ murder'd!
  Oh! treacherous Maid, thy Love has cost thee dear,
  Think on thy broken Vows, and call to Heaven for Mercy.
  Thy Death I will revenge, because I lov'd thee once.

  _Aur._ Oh! _Alonzo_, pardon me.

  _Alon._ to _Bass._ Now Villain, now what Story, what Pretence
  Canst thou invent to avoid my just Revenge?
  Oh! that I ne'er had list'ned to thy Tongue!
  Thy base perfidious Tongue! Then all these Murders
  Had been prevented, and thou curst in Hell----
  Thou monstrous Fiend----

  _Bass._ You talk too much--Let's see what you can do:
  Thus I return your Villain----

  _Alon._ Take thy Reward.        [_They fight_, Bassino _falls_.

      _Enter_ Armando.

  _Arm._ Hold! hold: Oh Gods! I'm come too late,
  What has my fatal Friendship done!
  Ha----_Placentia_ too--curst Letter!

  _Bass._ My Friend _Armando_! Oh! I blush to see thee:
  But let me have your Pardon----now I need it.

  _Arm._ Oh! first pardon me----
  For I have been the Cause of all this Mischief.
  Whilst my officious Friendship strives to save you,
  I bring you all to this unhappy End.
  Say, can you pardon me?

  _Bass._ I do----
  And Oh! my Friend! had Virtue been my Guide,
  As it was thine, I still were truly happy.

  _Aur._ Where am I?
  Why do I hover thus 'twixt Rest and Misery?
  Oh! good _Alonzo_, say you pardon me,
  And let me die in Peace, else full of Horror
  My guilty Soul must wander in the Shades
  Of gloomy Night, and never, never rest.

  _Alon._ Thou hast my Pardon, and with it this Promise
  Never to love again----

  _Aur._ Oh! you're----too----kind--and I want--
  Breath to thank----you----Farewel,                     [_Dies._

  _Bass._ Oh! _Placentia_!                       [_Embraces her._
  Thus in thy Arms my Thread of Life shall break.

  _Pla._ My Lord, my Husband, Oh! come nearer yet,
  That I may take a parting Kiss, to smooth
  My Passage to the Realms of endless Night.      [_Kissing him._
  So--Now--I die----much happier than I lived.
  Farewel----                                            [_Dies._

  _Bass._ Farewel, fair Excellence! Thou best of Wives!
  But I shall quickly follow--Yet before I go,
  I beg, _Alonzo_, let my Death atone
  For all the Injuries my Life has done you.
  Oh! spare my Memory, when I'm no more.

  _Alon._ By Heaven!
  I see such Virtue struggling in thy Breast,
  As makes me wish I could prevent the Flight
  Of thy departing Soul----

  _Bass._ No, No----I would not live:
  Hadst thou not come, my Hand had set me free,
  But now I fell more nobly, and less guilty.
  My Friend, my dear _Armando_,
  Haste to inform my Prince, _Bassino_ rests;
  But hide, if possible, my Shame: And let
  One Grave hold both this wretched Corps and mine,
  Oh! my _Placentia_----                                 [_Dies._

  _Alon._ Unhappy Pair! But far more wretched me!
  For I must live, and live without _Aurelia_!
  Tho' I'm convinc'd she lov'd me not, I can't
  Banish her Image from my Love-sick Mind.
  Oh! that I ne'er had seen the charming Fair!

  _Arm._ The Gods are just in all their Punishments:
  And by this single Act, we plainly see
  That Vengeance always treads on Perjury;
  And tho' sometimes no Bolts be at us hurl'd,
  Whilst we enjoy the Pleasures of this World;
  Yet a Day awaits, a Day of general Doom,
  When guilty Souls must to an Audit come;
  Then that we may not tremble, blush, or fear,
  Let our Desires be just; our Lives unsullied here.
                                                 [_Exeunt omnes._

[Decoration]



TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE


Contemporary spellings and hyphenation have been retained, even where
inconsistent; so the text contains both, e.g. thou'rt and thour't,
you'rs and your's.

At the very beginning of Act 5, Scene 1, a speech wrongly given to
Ludovic has been assigned to Lucy in keeping with the logic of the
dialogue.

Two obvious typographical errors were corrected: "Reputatron" became
"Reputation" in Act 2, Scene 2 (Ludovic); "connot" was changed to
"cannot" in Act 4, Scene 1 (Placentia).

Two further changes to the text are listed below:

In Act 1, scene 3, the word "I" was added before the first occurrence of
the word "cannot" in the following passage spoken by Aurelia:

     In vain I strive to check my new-born Love, I cannot, cannot
     live without _Bassino_

In Act 3, scene 2, one instance of the word "own" was deleted in the
following sentence spoken by Lucy:

     What would you say now, Madam, if I should contrive a Way to
     have your Lover in your own Chamber?





End of Project Gutenberg's The Perjur'd Husband, by Susanna Centlivre

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PERJUR'D HUSBAND ***

***** This file should be named 38931-8.txt or 38931-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/9/3/38931/

Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Canada Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Book Search project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
